One, two, three, four. One, two, three, four.
Five, six, seven, eight. Five, six, seven, eight.
This is November 22nd. My calendar's around every
reason I'm glancing at it. 37 years ago at this
moment, we were hearing the news of the
assassination of President Kennedy. I have the
honor and joy of chatting with former Dean of
Medicine Robert Stone, Bob, to begin with, would
you introduce yourself to anyone who might listen
or read the transcript of this, describe where you
grew up, what mom and dad did, where did you go to
high school and college, experience before
coming to A&M?
I was born in Manhattan. on what had been the site of
Peter Stuyvesant's farm
but was no longer Peter Stuyvesant's farm. Early
on we moved to Winston-Salem and then
subsequently returned during the Depression to
Brooklyn and I went to grade school, finished
grade school in Brooklyn went to a boys high school
in Brooklyn. It was called Boys High School, had
been and was still, I think, a distinguished
institution that taught Latin and Greek. It was an
ethnically very mixed neighborhood, but also in
transition. It's now part of
Bedford-Stuyvesant, which is the Brooklyn
equivalent of Harlem. There's a difference. I
went from there to Brooklyn College
and I think Brooklyn College was a distinguished
school at that time too I was an extremely poor
student on probation alternate years academic
probation
and in 1942 I joined the United States Navy was in
the Navy for four years and then
and knew for some years that I wanted to go to
medical school I was accepted at the what was then
called Long Island College of Medicine during the
time that I was there it was absorbed by the State
University of New York and became SUNY downstate.
Received my degree there and
went up to Columbia Presbyterian for two years of
pathology and then as part of the original faculty
at UCLA in medicine as that school was being
developed. What year was that? 1952.
I finished my formal pathology training at UCLA.
UCLA had, oh, I was due for a sabbatical and
proposed to go to Rockefeller Foundation, which I
did, and then to go on from there for the second six
months to the Netherlands. electron microscopy
of viruses. But UCLA had developed a bilateral
arrangement with Yale University to staff the
Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission office in
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. And I was given the
opportunity then to extend my sabbatical for
another six months to make it one year. So, with a
baby that had just been born, was a week old, my
spouse and I went to Hiroshima and I worked there
for a year on the late effects of atomic radiation
and then returned to UCLA in 1963.
I was invited to become a member of the founding
faculty at the University of New Mexico Medical
School in Albuquerque.
I was chairman of the department, subsequently
became dean and vice president, and then took
another sabbatical, this time as a visiting
professor of management at the Sloan School, MIT.
While I was there, I was, as far as I was concerned,
unexpectedly invited to go and head the NIH, which
I did for two years.
I had
substantial, what shall I say, personality
differences with the hierarchy and HEW, HEW it was
at that time, and was invited to leave. So I left
there and went to the University of Oregon Health
Sciences Center in Portland as dean and vice
president, stayed for about two and a half, maybe
three years, and then had an opportunity to come to
Texas A&M. How did A&M and you first communicate?
Who spotted you? I think Dr. Prescott telephoned
me. I don't know where he got my name, I was
interested, we had a little dinner about two
months ago honoring
Sam Black and Jeanette Farris was there. We got
into a lot of reminiscing about the initiation of
the medical program because our guest speaker was
Jim Schofield. Jim had been the secretary for the
liaison committee on medical education at the
time that it was proposed to start the medical
school here in conjunction with Baylor College of
Medicine. And so we prodded Jim to reminisce.
There was a dean, I don't know his name, who was at
Baylor, who was sort of designated as the A&MD, and
you perhaps remember him. And then
Knight was appointed. In the course of the
conversation, Jeanette told me that my name had
been proposed prior to Dr. Knight's, but the
conclusion here, and maybe you were a part of it, I
don't know. was that I could not be moved from
Oregon. So they had invited Knight to come. I never
inquired into the circumstances that led to Dr.
Knight's retirement or whatever. But in any case,
at that time, there was a real question in the minds
of the regents, Joe Reynolds and others, as to
whether the medical school should continue at
all. And
Reynolds and Mac Prescott, I guess, went up to see
Jim Schofield and discussed how and should they
close the school. And it was apparently in that
conversation that my name was proposed,
seemingly already somewhat familiar to them. And
so Mac called me. Do you remember your reaction to
the call? Was it positive, negative? Well, I had
been on the liaison, a member of the liaison
committee on medical education. At the time, the
proposal came before that body or the
establishment of the medical school at Texas A&M.
I think it's fair to say that all of us were very
skeptical. It sounded like a rather bizarre
undertaking as it was proposed. And so I would say
this, to circle back slightly, that from the
perspective of Albuquerque, I had long looked at
Texas as an extremely wealthy state, one which
supported medical education enthusiastically
and handsomely. And so I was tantalized by the
possibility that the state would do equally well
at Texas A&M as it had done at the University of
Texas. All right, while we're at this point
chronologically, before we could get any kind of
preliminary certification approval, back when
the plan with Calhoun and Williams was a three-way
working relationship including Baylor. Yes. We
never could get any tentative approval of that.
You bet. Then I one day found some reference that
one of the key people at the national level had
worked at Baylor and he and Dr. DeBakey had not
gotten along. Who was that? That was Jim
Schofield. All right. And so I called that to
Calhoun's attention and he said, okay, we'll try.
And so the Baylor official link was eliminated and
very quickly our yes yes yes it was not as far as I can
tell and as I say I did have I do have some insight
into this from a different perspective 180
degrees different that Schofield was not being
vindictive vis-a-vis Baylor that it was far more
complicated academically complicated in the
eyes of the review committee yes Yes, indeed. When
Prescott called you, how soon before y'all
followed up after his first call? I don't remember
precisely, but it might have been as much as a week.
Did somebody visit? Did you come down here? Oh, I
came down, yes. Yes, I came down.
felt, and I guess that was true, proven to be true,
that we hit it off very well, very quickly. We went
to the Texan for supper. That was the elite, I
guess, the most distinguished place in town to go
and eat, and so we went there. And who was your host
during most of the visit, Prescott? I think so. I
don't remember clearly. And what was your
impression of what was here? Well, I had been on the
ground floor in the establishment of UCLA and of
the University of New Mexico. I had become part of a
loosely constituted group which were of
individuals, administrative individuals,
involved with the establishment of new medical
schools. It was rather a closed group. And I had a
lot of enjoyment about that was a time when, I'm
going back a little bit, a time when there was a
whole surge of new medical schools being
established. In fact, Texas A&M was at the tail end
of that rather than the height of that. But the
notion of establishing a new medical school and
having, I took it that it was establishing a new
medical school to come here, although some being
on hand already would not have viewed it that way
and did not. But I saw it as an opportunity to,
without being, I guess, pretentious or
overbearing, of shaping what a medical school
might be. and I knew something of the clinical
arrangements that could be established. I had
been through
some severe internecine battles both at UCLA and
at New Mexico and knew what the impact was of coming
in and establishing a new medical school in the
face of a practicing profession no matter how much
at the opening they said they were interested they
invited the medical school enthusiastic uh... in
those two instances and elsewhere around the
country there invariably was bloodshed and so i
saw an opportunity to develop the affiliation
with scott and white along a totally new direction
the only thing at least is somewhat comparable to
it was mayo which was different because mayo
medical school is a wholly owned subsidiary And I
might say parenthetically that the expectation
of a few of the physicians already on hand here was
not at all that we'd have that arrangement, but
rather that they would establish themselves as
professors in the new medical school, be
distinguished, and benefit financially from it.
And so they didn't view with enthusiasm the notion
of this new arrangement either. But I was
intrigued at the idea of, of a new medical school
being able to do something different and becoming
the dean of three medical schools. Did you have any
key discussions with anyone other than Vice
President Prescott? Oh I did of course. I knew the
medical education establishment very well. I
guess it's not unfair to say I was part of it. So yes,
I did consult with some people and get their
notions about what the prospects were here and how
colleagues on the LCME would react to some
proposals which were rather different from
usual. What advice did they give you? Just stay in
Oregon.
Stay in Oregon? go so far as to indicate they didn't
think this program would ever survive yes oh they
did yes yes and there are some who still believe
that um all right then here on the campus with whom
did you have serious discussions other than dr
prescott jarvis miller and uh williams and those
were the only people in general what what did they
oh they were 100 supportive 100% enthusiastic. I
would say that those three individuals, I can't
imagine three individuals who would have been
more supportive. Oh, and there's another one that
should be mentioned, and that is Walter Brindley.
I did have a couple of good sessions at Scott and
White and discussed with them what would happen if
if they became part of a medical school,
particularly a state medical school. And with
some trepidation, I can recall asking them, a
group around the table, the board, the Scott and
White board, I said, I'm not interested in being
provocative. But as a state medical school, we
will have to take students of all ethnic
backgrounds. We have got to do it. there were all
white faces around the table and all males as you
can imagine and I said what happens when we have
black medical students or I really wasn't
conscious of the Hispanic issue at that time but I
said black and I was reassured by those southern
gentlemen that they would accept them that they
would fit in, they would be treated as members of
the student body, and there would be no problem.
There never was, to my knowledge. At least none
ever came to my attention. Not a bit. It was some
years, I think, before we had our first black
student, but there was no problem. But I was afraid
that I would get read out. Now, this conversation,
what year was this? Oh, that must have been 1977.
I'm not certain, but I think so. When did you
arrive? I think 77. Might have been the tail end of
76. Did we yet have medical, were we already, did we
already have medical students? 24 first-year
students. They were already enrolled. They had
they had by then I guess really finished the first
year and that's what the problem was in the minds of
Reynolds the other regents and Prescott as to what
to do with those students if they closed the school
would there be a place for them elsewhere in the
country now was there as far as you were aware when
you arrived was there any question about funding
no And that probably was, to some extent, my fault.
That is, I didn't pursue that. I didn't hammer on
it. I was simply told that there would be resources
available to develop a medical school. And I took
that at face value. Did Williams, Miller,
Prescott, and others make any commitments about
facilities funding and staffing? No, no. And you
didn't lay down any conditions? No, no. There was
already a notion and maybe a commitment on the part
of the regents, I'm not certain about this, to
build a basic science building and that there
would be plenty of land available.
I did not believe and still do not believe that we
needed or wanted a university hospital and that,
although I must say that the men that I dealt with
were men of enormous goodwill. I don't think they
understood what it would mean to have a university
hospital. I've been there in Missouri. I know what
that means, or some of what that means, and I know
how many headaches they have missed as a result of
it. Yes. Let's see, and the only money question I'm
going to ask, what was your beginning salary? Do
you remember? I don't remember. It was, in my mind
at that time, generous. But it was not sufficient
to attract me here. Did it compare with what you
were making in Oregon?
I know it did because I know that the folks here made
inquiry at Oregon as to what my salary was. But I
simply do not remember. I'm not dissembling. I
simply don't remember what it was. Describe the
move of you and your wife and any family you had with
you at that time describe your move here how did
that go physical relocation
well there's
no problem about Mary and me Lael would have been
Lael is my daughter would have been at that time if
we're talking about 1977 she would have been 17
years old And there was a question of where she
would or should go to school. So she had been at the
National Cathedral School when we were in
Washington. She then, I guess, went to Concord
Academy, and she was applying to medical school.
Oh, I will tell you a little story about that. And
she was applying to college. And partly because we
were already on the West Coast, she had applied to
Stanford and been admitted to several schools,
but admitted to Stanford. And so I guess there was
no big problem about her moving. It was just about
the time that she started. I'd need to check the
dates, but I think she was just about to enter
Stanford. Shortly after we got here and got
settled and were so pleased with our only child
matriculating at Stanford, we were invited to
some sort of reception where people ask, you know,
your family. We had one daughter. Where is she?
She's at Stanford. Oh, she'll be transferring
here, won't she?
Maybe you better not put that in the record. No, no,
I think that's a good one. There must have been some
other experiences you had about comparing life on
the West Coast and D.C. with here. How easy was it to
become a Texan? Well, you see, it wasn't all that
different. I had been a Southerner. I had a good
part of my life grown up, or a good part of an
impressionable I'd grown up in Winston-Salem. I
even went occasionally to Baptist Sunday School.
And then I had lived in New Mexico. And I wasn't the
stereotypical Easterner, New Yorker, maybe even
worse, a Brooklynite, to put it right at the
bottom. So I didn't feel that there was much that I
needed to adapt very much. Jim Schofield reminded
me when we had this little dinner the other time
that I had asked him for advice before coming out
here. Jim boasts about being a fourth or fifth
generation Texan and coming. You use the term hard
shell Baptist. That's where he comes from. He
talks about it as his background, but he said,
Well, what I told you was don't talk so fast.
That was my total sociological adjustment. When
you arrived, describe where the students and the
faculty and the medical school facilities were
located. Well, sure.
they were in several buildings the students were
in several buildings and most notably in Teague
I need to go back a little bit again historically
when I went to UCLA our first offices were in
Quonset huts literally Quonset huts and in the
religious conferences building which was taken
out in order to give us some room to start the
medical school We grew into a rather massive
structure. But in 1963, when I went to
Albuquerque, we started out in a converted,
literally, seven-up bottling plant with a broken
pane of windows in the front and a mortuary, which
they bought for us. Fortunately, they were
adjacent to the campus. It became part of the
campus. So it wasn't a shock to me to move into those
kind of quarters. Additionally, because I had
been doing so much visiting as part of
accreditation of medical schools around the
country, I was very familiar with what were called
surge facilities, where the program at Davis was
one of the most beautiful I've ever seen. Davis, of
course, an agricultural school by heritage, they
started in the university stable and they had
taken the stables which were made of fine old
redwood and made the most beautiful quarters you
can imagine well that was that was the ultimate way
to go with the surge facilities so it didn't bother
me a bit that we were in temporary facilities here I
knew that we would be getting something in
addition and who were the key faculty members that
were here yeah
virtually all of the well all of the what's
so-called preclinical department heads had been
appointed the only one who was new coming just
before I came but whom I had an opportunity to sign
off on was George Cho but Garrett Iler was here
Wagner was here on anatomy Sam Black I hope you'll
talk with Sam if you haven't done so already all
right and let's see oh Joyce Davis with whom you
ought to talk to Phil was on the faculty an
internist and Phil was one of those doctors this I
think needs to be filtered filter Phil was one of
those people who anticipated being professor of
medicine and having a practice in the medical
school and when he saw the way things were going he
went into town and set up his practice didn't
bother Joyce a bit yes and that's
one place that I feel very strongly negative and
that was Elvin Smith I have subsequently come to
believe that this, I guess you better turn off,
really. To go to this issue of joining up with Scott
and White, it wasn't clear what we would do in the
way of clinical facilities. There was the
possibility that somehow we would work at the St.
Joseph Hospital. I went to Austin and had some
interviews there at Breckenridge. talked with
the faculty with the physicians on the staff there
to look at the possibility that the last two years
of the medical school would be in Austin rather
than in Scott and White and subsequently it was I
think I don't think it's overstating it to say it
was my decision that we would go with Scott and
White and we'd establish the relationship there
and it would bring along the VA hospital for
somewhat political reasons, but also
substantive reasons. And there was, Alvin
did not support that. And it has been, it has seemed
to be on his agenda from that time on to separate the
college from Scott and White. When did you first
begin to interact with Dr. Brindley? Oh, within
the first week or month or something like that. I
mean, I probably met them when I first came here
before I had taken the job. Describe Dr. Brindley,
first of all, by personality. Well, he was a
courtly southern gentleman.
He didn't have a white beard, but he could have been
Colonel Saunders or something. There was no
question about that. And his official, he was
president of? He was president of the Scott and
White Clinic Board. I think they called, yes,
president. And so he was, in fact, the CEO. Oh, yes,
indeed, indeed, indeed. And what was his basic
attitude about the A&M relationship? Oh, he was
enthusiastic. I don't think there's any
question. I think he
did not know how to mentally compute The, I'm going
to call them power relationships, just to be
simple and fast. But the authority
relationships, the responsibility
relationships as between the university and
Scott and White. And that was a major problem for
both the faculty here and the faculty in Temple, to
understand how they could work together. and how
they would be how they might be taking orders from
somebody else that is still I think it's greatly
diminished but that also always was an underlying
question of well what would be the dean's
authority would the dean decide whether or not
Scott and White could hire such and such a
physician And I think that that was the best part of
the relationship that I had with Scott and White.